To whom it may concern,

Thank you for reviewing my application. I'd like to share with you a bit about myself and my background, and why I am interested in pursuing a graduate degree in Mathematics.

I am broadly interested in topology, geometry, and algebra, and would like to specialize in topology. I am particularly drawn to homotopy theory and homological algebra, as well as recent work in category-theoretic approaches that aim to axiomatize and unify these theories. My interest primarily stems from courses I've taken in algebraic topology, where I saw that many geometric and topological methods could be recast in the language of exact sequences, derived functors, and homological algebra. 

My undergraduate research involved a similar notion, in which homotopy-theoretic methods can be recast in terms of quasi-isomorphisms, localization, and the language of $\infty$-categories – moreover, this language allows for the recovery of homology theories as the homotopy theories of suitably chosen categories, as well as the extension of classical homotopy theory to algebraic geometry via derived categories, and these are research directions that I find interesting and quite exciting. Since homological and homotopy-theoretic methods are often amenable to concrete calculations, this is a thread I would like to pull further and understand at a deeper level, with the hope is that these may yield ways to bring topological methods to bear not only on problems within topology, but also in related areas such as algebraic geometry, number theory, and combinatorics.

I am also interested in problems intrinsic to topology, which is where I focused much of my attention during my final two years of my undergraduate degree. My interest was piqued by sitting in on faculty seminars in differential and algebraic geometry during my junior year related to Ricci flow and the Weil conjectures, as well as lectures covering the Mayer-Vietoris sequence in an algebraic topology course. In addition to year-long courses in analysis and algebra, this led me to take point-set topology and knot-theory during my first year, and subsequently a year-long graduate qualifying exam course in algebraic topology. 

During my last two quarters, I worked with the professor for that course, Justin Roberts, on a research project that revolved around *spectral sequences*, an algebraic tool that can be used to compute homology. This culminated in a paper that describes the theory of spectral sequences in primarily algebraic language, which was submitted to a research program at my institution and afforded me the opportunity to present a poster at their year-end symposium for undergraduate research. It turns out that one can also use spectral sequences to compute homotopy groups, and I went on to create and present a poster on using spectral sequences to attack the classical (but difficult and largely unresolved) problem of computing homotopy groups of spheres.

To this end, I was tasked with learning a great deal of homotopy theory from a number of textbooks, expository notes, and published papers. This included construction of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, fibrations and their associated long exact sequences, and methods of “killing homotopy” via Postnikov and Whitehead towers, which can reduce computing homotopy groups to computing homology. One rich source of fibrations arises from classifying spaces of groups, which led to a study of principal bundles and characteristic classes. By studying these topics and branching into nearby areas, I learned about recent results such as Thurston’s Uniformization theorem and Geometrization conjecture, the Hopkins-Hill-Ravenel resolution of the “Kervaire Invariant One” problem, and the (still unresolved) smooth 4-dimensional Poincaré conjecture.

Outside of academia, I also have a great deal of work experience, as I worked as a software programmer before and throughout my degree. I first worked at a company in Silicon Valley, which primarily involved functional programming and 3D computer graphics. The former exposed me to category theory, while the latter involved a study of linear algebra, rigid geometry, representations of Lie groups (such as quaternions), triangulations of surfaces, and projective geometry. 

I later transitioned into data science, where my current work involves developing statistical spatial models and time series to predict various response variables at physical locations. This often involves a working knowledge of the differential geometry of spheres (such as measuring geodesics and smoothly changing local coordinates) as well as the construction of smooth surfaces and vector fields parametrized by points on a sphere which corresponds to physical locations. 

In both positions, I was often tasked with independently researching and constructing algorithms, writing and submitting proposals to external clients, and preparing written documentation and presentations detailing our methodologies – these skills have in turn proved useful in my academic life to help secure scholarships and research funding.

Moreover, my blend of experience in both programming and pure mathematics has also enabled me to create a number of interesting visualizations, diagrams, and coding experiments, many of which can be found on my personal website at https://dzackgarza.com under “Links and Projects”.

Although at this stage of my academic career it is hard to precisely state what problems I might pursue a dissertation in, my goal for graduate school is to work with faculty that are doing research in topology, geometry, or related areas **To this end, I believe I would be interested in working with Professors X, Y, and Z, and here are 2-3 sentences explaining why.**

From these experiences, I’ve discovered that what I love about mathematics is finding ways to come to new understandings of fundamental and important mathematical objects, and particularly finding ways to build connections between seemingly disparate areas. I also quite enjoy the process of constantly learning, teaching, giving talks, and learning from other mathematicians, and so I view a graduate degree as the first step towards a goal of building a career in mathematical research. Although I anticipate that this may be exceptionally challenging at times, I find that this challenge is often precisely what makes mathematics so rewarding!

Thank you for your consideration,

Daniel Zack Garza